Making transactions on Ethereum or any other blockchain will cost you a gas fee. The total gas fee consists of two parts:

Gas Units x Gas Price

Gas Units

Gas units is a number that depends on the amount of computation required for a transaction.

E.g. If you send some Ether (Ethereum’s native cryptocurrency) to someone, it requires 21,000 gas units. It’s the minimum number of units required for any transaction.

The number of required gas units increases as the complexity of the transaction increases.

E.g. Sending an ERC-20 token might cost around 60,000 gas units. Minting an NFT might cost around 120,000 gas units, and so on.

It all depends on how many computations need to be made while processing the transaction.

Gas Price

Gas price is determined by the demand for making transactions. The more the traffic, the higher the price.

It’s usually expressed in Gwei which is a billionth part of an Ether.

If the gas price is 100 Gwei, it means 1 gas unit currently costs 100 Gwei as per the demand. The gas price will vary throughout the day depending on the total traffic.

Let’s combine these two now. If you need to send some Ether to someone at a time when gas price for 1 gas unit is 100 Gwei, you’ll have to pay a total of:

21,000 gas units x 100 Gwei = 2,100,000 Gwei

Since Gwei is 1/1bn of Ether, you’ll pay 0.0021 Ether.

To find the amount in dollars, multiply it with the current price of ether i.e. 1200 USD (as of November, 2022).

Hence 0.0021 Ether x 1200 USD = 2.52 USD total gas fee

To summarise, the gas fee depends on:

Complexity of transaction (gas unit)
Demand for making transactions (gas price)
Price of Ether (to calculate dollar value)
Where does my gas fee go?

So, we know that we need to pay a gas fee when making a transaction. But where does it go now? Is it burnt? Or is it given to the validator?

Actually, it’s both, after the EIP-1559 (an upgrade to Ethereum that happened in September 2022).

Total gas fee is made up of:

Base Fee (fixed for every transaction of a block) – which gets burnt entirely
Max Priority Fee (decided by the user) – which goes to the validator partially or entirely depending on the Max Total Fee which is again decided by the user.
Let’s run through an example:

Suppose a user wants to pay a Max Total Fee of 100 Gwei per gas unit consumed for the transaction. It’s inclusive of the Base Fee (burnt) and Max Priority Fee (for validator).

While making the transaction, the user doesn’t know what the exact Base Fee will be for the transaction/block.

During peak time, a lot of people will be trying to make a transaction, thus congesting the network. This will cause your transaction to take a long time before going through. In order to prioritise his/her transaction, a user may want to pay some (extra) fee to the block validator. This fee is called the Max Priority Fee. Suppose the user wants it to be 30 Gwei per gas unit.

Hence, the user enters the values of 100 Gwei and 30 Gwei respectively.

When the block is confirmed, there are 2 possibilities depending on what is the final value of Base Fee:

Case 1: Base Fee + Max Priority Fee <= Max Total Fee

E.g.

Base Fee = 60,

Max Priority Fee = 30,

Max Total Fee = 100

Hence,

60 Gwei is burnt, (per gas unit)

30 Gwei goes to the validator, (per gas unit)

The remaining 10 Gwei is refunded to the user (per gas unit)

Case 2: Base Fee + Max Priority Fee > Max Total Fee

E.g.

Base Fee = 80,

Max Priority Fee = 30,

Max Total Fee = 100

Hence,

80 Gwei is burnt, (per gas unit)

Only 20 Gwei goes to the validator (per gas unit), since Max Total Fee is 100 Gwei

0 refund for the user since the max limit is consumed.

Note: Base Fee can’t be >= Max Total Fee. Your Metamask wallet will let you know if the Max Total Fee entered by you is not sufficient as per the network conditions.